 
 
 
Abstract—Orthogonal 
Frequency 
Division 
Multiplexing 
(OFDM) technique has been widely adopted in many wireless 
communication systems due to its high data-rate transmission 
ability and robustness to the multipath fading channel. One of the 
major disadvantages of OFDM technique is the high PAPR in the 
time domain signal. The larger peak-to-average power ratio 
(PAPR) would cause the fatal degradation of BER performance 
and undesirable spectrum regrowth. One of the promising PAPR 
reduction methods is the Selective Mapping method (SLM) which 
can achieve better PAPR performance without signal distortion. 
In this paper, a new effective PAPR reduction technique using 
SLM based on Genetic Algorithm (GA) is proposed. GA is applied 
to SLM-OFDM system for searching the optimum phase rotation 
factors and reducing computational burden. The simulation 
results show that the proposed GA based SLM-OFDM system 
provides better PAPR reduction compared to conventional SLM-
OFDM system. 
 
Keywords— Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing 
(OFDM), Peak-to-Average  Power Ratio (PAPR), Selected  mapping  
(SLM), Genetic  Algorithm  (GA).  
I. INTRODUCTION 
OFDM  has  many  well  known  advantages  such  as robustness  
against  frequency  selective  fading  or  narrowband 
interference,  high  bandwidth  efficiency,  and  efficient 
implementation [1]. Recently, it is widely used in many digital 
communication systems such us Digital Television (DTV), 
Digital Audio Broadcasting (DAB), Digital Subscriber Line 
(DSL) broadband internet access, standards for Wireless Local 
Area Networks (WLANs), standards for Wireless Metropolitan 
Area Networks (WMANs), and 4G mobile communications 
[2],[3]. The principle of OFDM is to divide a high rate 
information bitstream into several parallel low rate data 
substreams and use these substreams to modulate a number of 
orthogonal subcarriers by Fourier transform techniques. 
However, one drawback of OFDM is that the transmitted signal 
has a high PAPR when the subcarriers add up coherently. A 
high PAPR not only degrades efﬁciency of a linear power 
ampliﬁer but also limits the application of OFDM transmission 
systems. Therefore, PAPR reduction in OFDM systems is an 
active area of research and has widely attracted the attention of 
researchers [2] [4]. 
In order to reduce the PAPR effectively, various techniques have 
been proposed such as clipping [5], coding [6], Tone Reservation 
(TR) [7], Partial Transmit Sequence (PTS) [8] and Selective 
Mapping (SLM) [9]. Conventional SLM techniques generate a 
 
 
number of sequences by altering the phase information from a 
sequence that consists of a fixed number of statistically 
independent elements, and the sequence with the lowest PAPR 
is chosen. Genetic algorithms (GA) [10] [11] (a type of 
evolutionary computing), are search techniques based on 
probabilities that reflect natural genetics. These algorithms are 
widely used to search for a global optimum in combinatorial 
problems due to their simplicity. In this paper, we present a new 
SLM-OFDM technique for improved PAPR reduction that have 
low complexity due to local search using a GA. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section II brieﬂy shows the 
OFDM signal model and the PAPR problem. In section III, the 
conventional SLM-OFDM is described. GA based SLM-
OFDM is proposed in section IV. Then, the simulation results 
are presented in section V. Finally, conclusions are drawn in 
section VI. 
II. THE OFDM SIGNAL MODEL AND PAPR PROBLEM 
       The OFDM signal is the sum of 𝑁 independent signals 
modulated onto sub-channels of equal bandwidth, which can be 
efﬁciently implemented by an Inverse Fast Fourier Transform 
(IFFT) operation, as illustrated in Figure 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1: The IFFT implementation of an OFDM symbol. 
Let 𝑋= [𝑋(0), 𝑋(1), … , 𝑋(𝑁−1)]  denotes an input symbol 
sequence including 𝑁𝑃 equally spaced pilot symbols in the 
frequency domain, where 𝑋(𝑘), 0 ≤𝑘≤𝑁−1 is the complex 
data transmitted at the 𝑘𝑡ℎ subcarrier, and 𝑁 the number of 
subcar- riers of the OFDM system. The time-domain signal 
vector 𝑥= [𝑥(0), 𝑥(1), … , 𝑥(𝑁−1)]   of the OFDM system is 
obtained by performing the 𝑁-point inverse fast Fourier 
transform (IFFT) of 𝑋, and the 𝑁𝑡ℎ element of 𝑥 is given as: 
A new SLM technique based on Genetic Algorithms 
for PAPR reduction in OFDM systems 
• 
• 
• 
 
X (0) 
 
X (1) 
 
X (k) 
 
 
 
 
X (N-1) 
• 
• 
• 
 
x[0] 
 
x[1] 
 
 
x[n] 
 
 
 
x[N-1] 
IFFT 
Tarik Hadj Ali and A. Hamza 
LISIC Laboratory, FEI, USTHB, Algeria 
hadjtbm@yahoo.fr
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS
Volume 10, 2016
ISSN: 1998-4480
91

 
 
 
𝑥(𝑛) = 1
𝑁∑𝑋(𝑘)𝑒𝑗2𝜋𝑘𝑛
𝑁 ,      0 ≤𝑛≤𝑁−1
𝑁−1
𝑘=0
 
(1) 
 
The PAPR of the transmitted OFDM signal vector x in (1) can 
be deﬁned as: 
𝑃𝐴𝑃𝑅(𝑥) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥0≤𝑛≤𝑁−1|𝑥(𝑛)|2
𝐸{|𝑥(𝑛)|2}
 
(2) 
Complementary Cumulative Distribution Function (CCDF) is 
one of the most frequently used performance measure for PAPR 
reduction techniques. It calculates the probability that the PAPR 
of a data block exceeds a given threshold 𝑃𝐴𝑃𝑅0 and be 
computed 
by 
Monte 
Carlo 
Simulation 
[12]. 
The 
Complementary Cumulative Distribution Function (CCDF) of 
the PAPR of 𝑁 symbols of a data block with Nyquist rate 
sampling is deﬁned as: 
𝑃𝑟(𝑃𝐴𝑃𝑅≥𝑃𝐴𝑃𝑅0) = 1 −𝑃𝑟(𝑃𝐴𝑃𝑅≤𝑃𝐴𝑃𝑅0) 
= 1 −(1 −𝑒𝑃𝐴𝑃𝑅0)𝑁 
(3) 
III. SELECTIVE MAPPING TECHNIQUE (SLM)  
  The block diagram of SLM technique is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Fig 2: Functional block diagram of the SLM technique. 
In this approach, firstly 𝑀 statistically independent input data 
sequences 𝑋𝑚 which represent the same information are 
generated, and then each sequence are processed by 𝑀 parallel 
𝑁-point complex IFFT to generate 𝑀 different time-domain 
OFDM symbols 𝑥𝑚 . The OFDM  symbol with the smallest 
PAPR is selected for transmission [13], [14]. 
The key point of SLM method lies in how to generate multiple 
distinct time-domain OFDM symbols when the input data for 
transmission is the same. For this purpose, 𝑀 pseudo-random 
phase rotation sequences 𝜓𝑚 are generated. 
 
𝜓𝑚= [𝜓𝑚,0    𝜓𝑚,1 …   𝜓𝑚,𝑁−1]  𝑇 
(4) 
With  𝑚= 1,2, … . , 𝑀 , 𝜓𝑚,𝑘= 𝑒𝑗𝜑𝑚,𝑘   and 𝜑𝑚,𝑘 is uniformly 
distributed in [0, 2𝜋] and 0 ≤𝑘≤𝑁−1 . This process can be 
seen as performing a dot product operation on the input tones 
𝑋= [𝑋(0), 𝑋(1), … , 𝑋(𝑁−1)]  with rotation factors  𝜓𝑚. 
 
𝑋𝑚= 𝑋. 𝜓𝑚,      𝑚= 1,2, … . , 𝑀    
(5) 
 
Then, the time-domain OFDM symbols 𝑥𝑚 can be written as: 
 
𝑥𝑚= 𝐼𝐹𝐹𝑇{𝑋𝑚} = 𝐼𝐹𝐹𝑇{𝑋. 𝜓𝑚}    
(6) 
 
In practice, all the elements of the phase sequence 𝜓1  are set to 
1 to make this branch sequence as the original OFDM symbol. 
This approach is applicable with all types of modulation and 
any number of subcarriers. The amount of PAPR reduction for 
SLM depends on the number of phase sequences 𝑀 and the 
design of the phase sequences. 
IV. PROPOSED GA BASED SLM-OFDM SYSTEM 
This  section  investigates  how  GA  can  be  used  for  phase 
optimization  of  SLM-OFDM  system. In  order  to  solve  the  
optimization  problem  of this system  and  acquiring  more  
PAPR  reduction,  the  proposed technique  uses  GA  as  the  
selection  mechanism  of  phase rotation  factors  for  SLM-
OFDM  system.  GA,  which  is  a search  heuristic  algorithm  
based  on  the  process  of  natural evolution, can find a good 
solution for optimization problems by evolving the population 
of solutions with genetic operators such as selection, mutation 
and crossover [15]. The  block  diagram  of  the  proposed  GA  
based  SLM- OFDM system is shown in Figure 3.  
 
 
 
Fig 3: Functional block diagram of the proposed  GA  based  SLM- 
OFDM technique. 
 
In order to employ the GA method  to  find  the  optimum  phase  
factors  that  minimize  the PAPR  in  the  SLM-OFDM  system,  
the  following optimization problem is required to be solved: 
 
𝜓𝑜𝑝𝑡= 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛𝜓{𝑚𝑎𝑥0≤𝑛≤𝑁−1|𝑥𝑚(𝑛)|2
𝐸{|𝑥𝑚(𝑛)|2}
} 
 
(7) 
Where 𝑚= 1,2, … . , 𝑀 and 𝜓𝑜𝑝𝑡  is  the  optimum  phase  
rotation  factors. 
The selection  mechanism of  GA based SLM-OFDM is 
described as follows: 
 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS
Volume 10, 2016
ISSN: 1998-4480
92

 
 
Proposed Algorithm: GA-SLM-OFDM method 
 
1. Select  the  first  population  size,  the  mutation 
probability,  crossover  probability,  and  initial 
population  randomly.  Each  gene  represents  a  vector 
of phase factor candidate. 
2. Calculate  the  PAPR  value  for  each  gene  by 
multiplying  𝑋  with  the  set  of  phase  rotation  factors 
as given by (6). 
3. Select genes with smallest PAPR value (called set of 
parents). 
4. Crossover  and  mutate  all  genes  to  generate  a  new 
genes (offsprings). 
5. Go  back  to  step  2  using  the  new  generated 
population.  The  processing  is  repeatedly  executed 
until  termination  (maximum  number  of  generation). 
The vector of phase rotation  factors  with the lowest 
PAPR  are  used  for  the  transmitted  data  and  sent  
to the receiver. 
6. End 
 
V. SIMULATION RESULTS 
    Using  MATLAB  software  simulation  analysis  of  PAPR 
reduction  is  performed  by averaging over 104  randomly 
OFDM symbols with  QPSK  modulation. The analysis of 
PAPR performance for original OFDM,  the  conventional 
SLM-OFDM and GA  based  SLM-OFDM systems is presented 
in terms of CCDF. The  simulation  parameters  used  through  
the comparative study are stated in Table I.  
 
Table I: Simulation parameters. 
 
System parameters 
Value 
Number of subcarriers 
Modulation type 
Phase rotations 
Size of initial population 
Number of iteration   
Mutation probability  
Crossover probability 
128 
QPSK 
-1, 1, j, -j 
150 
10 
0.3 
0.7 
 
 
Fig 4: CCDF of the OFDM for SLM technique with different number 
of phase sequences 𝑀 and 𝑁= 128 subcarrier. 
As shown in Figure 4, it can  be  observed  that  the  
conventional  SLM  method  displays  a  better  PAPR  reduction 
performance than the original OFDM signal which is free of 
any PAPR reduction scheme. The  probability  of  high  PAPR  
is  significantly  decreased.  Increasing the number of phase 
sequences 𝑀  leads  to  the improvement of PAPR reduction 
performance. If the probability is set to 10-2 and then the CCDF  
curves  with  different  𝑀  values  are  compared.  The  PAPR  
value  of  case  𝑀= 2  is about  1.5 dB  smaller  than  the  
unmodified  one  𝑀= 1.  Under  the  same  condition,  the  
PAPR value of case 𝑀= 16 is about 3.2 dB smaller than the 
original one 𝑀= 1. However,  from the comparison  of  the  
curve  𝑀=8  and  𝑀=16,  we  learned  that  the  performance  
difference between these two cases is about 0.5 dB. This proves 
that we will not be able to achieve a linear growth of PAPR 
reduction performance with further increase the value of 𝑀 
(like 𝑀≥8),  the  PAPR  reduction  performance  of  OFDM  
signal  will  not  be  considerably improved and it will also add 
more computational complexity. 
 
 
Fig 5: CCDF of the original OFDM, GA based  OFDM-SLM and 
OFDM-SLM techniques with (𝑀= 8,16). 
The PAPR Reduction performance of proposed GA based 
SLM-OFDM  system  is  compared  with  conventional  SLM- 
OFDM  system  in  Fig 5 . The simulation  depicts  that  GA  
based SLM-OFDM  is  more  effective  in  reducing  the  PAPR  
than SLM-OFDM. At  CCDF  probability of  10-2, GA  based 
SLM-OFDM attains  5.8 dB  PAPR,  while  the  SLM-OFDM 
with ( 𝑀= 16 ) attains 6.7 dB with reduction gain of 0.9 dB. 
We can notice also that the PAPR reduction gain of the GA  
based SLM-OFDM compared with original OFDM is about 4 
dB. 
From Figure 6, it can be seen that the proposed GA based  
OFDM-SLM algorithm undeniably improves the  performance 
of OFDM system,  moreover, with the increasing of population 
size 𝑃, the improvement of PAPR reduction performance 
becomes better and better. Assume that we fix the probability 
of PAPR at 10-2, and compare the CCDF curve with different 𝑃 
values. Form the Figure 6, we notice that the CCDF  curve  has  
nearly  0.2 dB  improvement  when  𝑃  =  300 compared  to 𝑃  
=  150.  When  𝑃  = 600,  the  10-2  PAPR  is  about  5.4 dB,  so  
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS
Volume 10, 2016
ISSN: 1998-4480
93

 
 
an  optimization  of  more than 0.35 dB is achieved compared 
to 𝑃  =  150. 
 
 
Fig 6: CCDF of the GA based  OFDM-SLM technique with different 
population size 𝑃. 
 
 
Fig 7: CCDF of the GA based  OFDM-SLM technique with different 
iteration values . 
Figure 7  shows  the  effect  of  the  iterations  on  the  PAPR  
performance. It can be seen that the  PAPR  is reduced  clearly  
by  increasing the number of iterations.  
VI. CONCLUSION  
In  this  paper,  an  efficient  technique  based  on  GA  
is proposed  to  achieve  PAPR  reduction.  The  PAPR  
reduction performance of the proposed SLM-OFDM system 
using GA for  optimum  phase  rotation  factors  searching  was  
compared with  the original  OFDM and conventienal SLM-
OFDM systems. According  to  the  simulation  results,  the  
proposed  GA  based SLM-OFDM  outperforms  the  compared  
systems with  low computational complexity.   
 
REFERENCES   
[1] R.  V.  Nee  &  R.  Prasad,  “OFDM  wireless  multimedia 
communications,” Artech House, 2000.    
[2] S. H.   Han  &  J. H.   Lee,  “An   overview  of   peak-to-average   power  
ratio      reduction      techniques    for      multicarrier    transmission,”  
IEEE Wireless  Communications  Magazine, Vo.  12,  No.  2,  pp.56-65,  
Apr. 2005.    
[3] IEEE 802.16d, Air interface for ﬁxed broadband wireless access systems, 
IEEE 802.16, May 2004. 
[4] T. Jiang and Y. Y. Wu,”An Overview: Peak-to-Average Power Ratio 
Reduction Techniques for OFDM Signals,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 
54, no. 2, pp. 257–268, June 2008.  
[5] S. S. H. Masoumian, M. Shabani, and B. M. Tazehkand, “A New PAPR  
Reduction Method Based on Clipping Technique Using Compressive 
Sensing,” 6th International Symposium on Telecommunications, pp.238- 
242,2012. 
[6] Y. J. Shi, D. Z. He, W. Huang, Y. Xu, Y. F. Guan, and J. Sun, 
“Constellation Shifting Based on QAM with Gray Coding for PAPR 
Reduction of OFDM Systems,” IEEE International Symposium on 
Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting, pp.1-3, 2013. 
[7] J. C. Chen and C. P. Li, “Tone reservation using near-optimal peak 
reduction tone set selection algorithm for PAPR reduction in OFDM 
systems,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 933-936, Nov. 
2010. 
[8] 
S. Pyla, K. P. Raju, and N. Balasubrahmanyam, “PAPR Reduction in OFDM 
Systems Using PTS and Various Modulation Scheme,” 15th International 
Conference on Advanced Computing Technologies, pp.1-6, 2013. 
[9] J. W. Ji and G. L. Ren, “A New Modified SLM Scheme for Wireless 
OFDM Systems without Side Information,” IEEE Signal Processing 
Letters, vol.20, no.11, pp.1090-1093, 2013. 
[10] M. Srinivas and L.M. Patnaik, “Genetic algorithms: A survey,” IEEE 
Computer, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 17–26, June 1994. 
[11] L. Davis, Handbook of Genetic Algorithms, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
1991. 
[12] S. Muller and J. Huber, “OFDM with reduced peak-to-average power 
ratio by optimum combination of partial transmit sequences,” Electronics 
Letters, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 368–369, 1997. 
[13] R. W. Bauml, R. F. H. Fisher and J. B. Huber, “Reducing the Peak-to-
Average Power Ratio of Multicarrier Modulation by Selected Mapping”, 
Electronics Letters, vol. 32, no. 22, pp. 20562057, Oct. 1996 
[14] S. J. Heo, H. S. Noh, J. S. No and D. J. Shin “A Modiﬁed SLM Scheme 
With Low Complexity for PAPR Reduction of OFDM Systems”, IEEE 
Trans. on Broadcasting, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 802- 808, Dec. 2007. 
[15] Y. Wang, W. Chen, and C. Tellambura, “Genetic algorithm based nearly 
optimal peak reduction tone set selection for adaptive amplitude clipping 
PAPR reduction,” IEEE Trans. on Broadcast., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 462- 471, 
Sept. 2012. 
 
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS
Volume 10, 2016
ISSN: 1998-4480
94
