1
Deep Unfolding Network for PAPR Reduction in
Multi-Carrier OFDM Systems
Minh-Thang Nguyen, Georges Kaddoum, Senior Member, IEEE, Bassant Selim, Member, IEEE, K. V.
Srinivas, Member, IEEE, and Paulo Freitas de Araujo-Filho
Abstract—In this letter, we propose a Deep Unfolding Net-
work called PR-DUN to reduce the peak-to-average power ratio
(PAPR), which is a thorny problem in Orthogonal Frequency-
Division Multiplexing (OFDM) systems. The proposed multi-layer
model is constructed by unrolling an iterative algorithm resulting
in layers with trainable parameters, which are optimized to
minimize a loss function related to the PAPR value. The deep
unfolding model uses the backpropagation algorithm to transfer
gradients backwards to adjust parameters. Furthermore, the pro-
posed scheme can accommodate any transmit power constraint,
and therefore can control the power increase caused by the
auxiliary signal. Simulation results show that the proposed PR-
DUN model achieves a larger PAPR reduction and a smaller bit
error rate while being less computationally intensive than related
solutions.
Index Terms—Peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR), bit error
rate (BER), orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM),
deep unfolding network.
I. INTRODUCTION
In Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing (OFDM)
systems, a large peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR) can
cause the power amplifiers (PAs) to operate in the nonlinear
regime, and therefore lead to signal distortion and data rate
degradation. To suppress the PAPR, the algorithm proposed
in [1] obtains a peak-cancellation signal through an itera-
tive algorithm that relies on the Signal to Clipping noise
power Ratio (SCR), which has several advantages. It reduces
the PAPR without increasing signal distortions or modifying
the modulation/demodulation scheme by reserving a small
set of sub-carriers in the frequency domain to inject peak-
cancellation signals. Further, it requires side information only
if the reserved sub-carriers’ positions change and it has low
computational complexity as it avoids multiple Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) and Inverse FFT (IFFT) operations. However,
[1] relies on a static threshold that does not fully exploit
the power of the reserved sub-carriers to generate peak-
cancellation signals, thus limiting the PAPR reduction. In
This work was funded and supported by Mitacs Accelerate Fellowship and
Ericsson GAIA in Montreal, and supported in part by Fonds de recherche du
Qu´ebec B2X Scholarship and CAPES.
Minh-Thang Nguyen and Georges Kaddoum are with the Electrical
Engineering Department,
´Ecole de technologie sup´erieure (´ETS), Uni-
versity of Quebec, Montreal, QC H3C 1K3, Canada. (email: minh-
thang.nguyen.1@etsmtl.ca, georges.kaddoum@etsmtl.ca)(corresponding au-
thor: Minh-Thang Nguyen)
Bassant Selim and K. V. Srinivas are with Ericsson, Canada. (email:
bassant.selim@ieee.org, kvsrinivas@ieee.org).
Paulo Freitas de Araujo-Filho is with the Electrical Engineering Depart-
ment, ´ETS, and also with the Centro de Inform´atica, Universidade Federal
de Pernambuco (UFPE), Recife 50670-901, Brazil (e-mail: paulo.freitas-de-
araujo-filho.1@etsmtl.ca).
addition, it does not consider the transmit power increment
that results from the added auxiliary signal.
To facilitate the sub-carrier reservation, the works in [2]–
[4] proposed iterative algorithms based on the least squares
approximation of the clipping noise. They aim to reduce the
convergence time at the expense of increasing the computa-
tional complexity. The work in [5], on the other hand, opti-
mized the sub-carrier reservation set in the frequency domain
using a genetic algorithm, and adopted the SCR algorithm to
suppress peaks. However, due to the dynamic input signal, it
is impossible for the methods in [2]–[5] to control the power.
Moreover, the static setting of the PAPR threshold in these
works limits the PAPR reduction achieved, and can even cause
violations of transmit power constraints.
The works in [6]–[10] rely on neural network models, which
are black-box optimization methods, to alleviate the PAPR
problem. In [6], a neural network is trained to approximate the
desired output signal pattern by modifying the constellation
so that the PAPR is reduced. However, due to the dynamic
input signal, distortion due to the modified constellation can
lead to decoding errors. In [7], the encoder and decoder of
an autoencoder network substitute the modulation and de-
modulation modules, respectively, simultaneously minimizing
the PAPR and inter-symbol interference. However, when the
channel conditions vary, the modulated signal suffers from an
I/Q imbalance resulting in an increased bit error rate (BER) at
the receiver. Similarly, to simultaneously reduce the PAPR and
improve the signal reconstruction, a real-valued neural network
is designed in [8]. But the I/Q imbalance is also a critical factor
that challenges the robustness of this network against varying
channel conditions. The works in [9], [10] generate peak
cancellation signals using neural network models to exploit the
advantages of the sub-carrier reservation method. The models,
however, consider a static PAPR threshold while ignoring the
power limitation, which limits the PAPR reduction.
We develop a low-complexity approach by unrolling the
SCR algorithm as a multiple-layer model called the peak-
reduction deep unfolding network (PR-DUN). Our proposed
model adaptively generates auxiliary signals to suppress power
peaks for dynamic input signals. In a nutshell, the main con-
tributions of our work include: (i) each layer has one trainable
parameter that is optimized to minimize a loss function of the
peaks, so the proposed model requires very few parameters to
be fine-tuned; (ii) a training algorithm is developed to train
our proposed model to reduce PAPR; (iii) an algorithm for
guaranteeing the power limitation is embedded into the model;
and (iv) via simulation, we show that our proposed model
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LCOMM.2022.3195042
© 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: UCLA Library. Downloaded on November 09,2022 at 11:33:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2
achieves the largest PAPR reduction among the related works,
its inference time is short, and it is robust to varying channel
conditions.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
Without loss of generality, we consider an OFDM sys-
tem where a block of bits is mapped into the N-element
complex-valued OFDM vector of QAM constellation points
X = [X0, X1, . . . , XN−1]T , with Xk being the complex
symbol located at the kth sub-carrier.
xn =
1
√
N
N−1
X
k=0
Xke
j2πnk
N
.
In the matrix form, we have the equivalent x = QX, where
Q is the N-point IFFT matrix.
The PAPR of signal x is computed as the ratio of
its peak power to its average power, i.e., PAPR(x)
=
max
0⩽n⩽N−1 |xn|2/E
h
∥x∥2
2
i
. To measure the PAPR reduction
performance, we consider the Complementary Cumulative
Distribution Function (CCDF), which denotes the probability
that the PAPR exceeds a certain threshold PAPRth, as follows
CCDF (x) = Pr (PAPR(x) > PAPRth) .
The sub-carrier reservation method reserves several slots
in the frequency domain for an auxiliary signal c
=
[c0, c1, . . . , cN−1]T to cancel peak powers. The frequency
domain
of
the
auxiliary
signal
is
denoted
as
C
=
[C0, C1, . . . , CN−1]T . The data and auxiliary signal are ar-
ranged in disjoint positions in the frequency domain, such that
Xk+Ck = Xk for k /∈RS, and Xk+Ck = Ck for k ∈RS. To
reduce the PAPR, the auxiliary signal c is obtained by solving
the following optimization problem
min
c
max
0⩽n⩽N−1 |xn + cn| .
(1)
Since (1) is a quadratically constrained quadratic programming
(QCQP) problem, the optimal solution can be obtained using
a quadratic programming solver.
III. DEEP UNFOLDING NETWORK FOR PAPR REDUCTION
We describe the PR-DUN model, shown in Fig. 1, then
show its PAPR reduction and a power control algorithm. After
that, we present the training algorithm and the computational
complexity analysis.
A. Network Architecture
The l-th layer of our proposed PR-DUN model1 is given by
¯x(l) = x + c(l),
(2)
nl = arg max
0⩽n<N
¯x(l) [n]
 ,
(3)
α(l) = fact
 
w(l)
r
E
h
∥x∥2i
+
¯x(l) [nl]

!
ej∠(¯x(l)[nl]),
(4)
c(l+1) = ΠΩ

c(l) −α(l)p [((n −nl))N]

,
(5)
1The architectures of deep neural networks (DNNs) are generic and it
is unclear how a relation between input and output data is established.
Therefore, DNNs are usually considered as a black-box approach. In contrast,
our proposed model is explicitly constructed by modeling a PAPR reduction
mechanism relying on the SCR algorithm in [1].
 !
"!
#$ !
% !
$
arg max
&'()* #$ ! "
+,#$ - (
./01
2
" 3 "!
*
4!
 !56
$
3
7
$ 8
8
9:
; = <
; = >
; = ? 3 @
… 
… 
$
 A
% &
% !
% BC6
 D
 E
 F
Fig. 1: Architecture of the proposed PR-DUN.
where a set of L variables w =

w(1), . . . , w(L)	
is optimized
using a stochastic optimization algorithm, and fact is an
activation function, for which we select the rectified linear
unit (ReLU) that allows positive magnitude value. Moreover,
p = [p1, p2, . . . , pN−1]T presents the discrete-time domain
kernel, p [((n −nl))N] is the right circular shift operator of
vector p by nl, and α(l) is a scaling factor, which is updated
every iteration. The kernel p, designed such that every time the
algorithm cancels a peak at position nl of ¯x(l) other positions
are minimally affected by side lobes of the auxiliary signal c,
is calculated beforehand2 [1]. The time kernel p is computed
as p =
√
N/MQP, where the frequency domain kernel
P = [P0, P1, . . . , PN−1]T . Note that Pk = 0 for k /∈RS,
while Pk = 1 for k ∈RS.
In (5), the operand ΠΩ(y) denotes the projection of y
on to the feasible set Ωof signal c. The set Ωis given
as Ω=
n
c|E
h
∥x + c∥2
2
i
⩽δ2o
, where δ2 is the power
threshold. Note that the set Ωis convex, and is in fact a
ball with center x and radius δ. Accordingly, the orthogonal
projection on the set Ωis given as
ΠΩ(y) = −x +
δ
max
r
E
h
∥x + y∥2
2
i
, δ
 (x + y) .
(6)
Our method differs from the SCR algorithm in [1] in two
ways. First, (4) updates α(l) adaptively for the l-th layer using
trainable coefficient w(l) and the activation function fact. Due
to the auxiliary signal, the transmit power increases and can
exceed the maximum allowable value. Second, to satisfy the
power limitation, (5) is used to fine tune the auxiliary signal.
The theoretical meaning of (6) is that there always exists a
point that is the intersection between the ball Ωand a straight
line crossing two points x and y. We note that, when the
power constraint is violated, the point y is outside the ball Ω.
In electronic circuits, temperature fluctuation affects the PAs’
operation by inducing the power gain offset, which can lead to
signal clipping. To combat the varying temperature, a solution
is to the estimate power gain offset first, and then reduce the
2FFTs and IFFTs are not required to compute the time domain kernel
signal p every time because the reserved sub-carriers’ positions in the
frequency domain are fixed.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LCOMM.2022.3195042
© 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: UCLA Library. Downloaded on November 09,2022 at 11:33:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3
power constraint for training our model by the estimated offset.
However, we are primarily presenting the proposed model in
this letter, and modeling the power gain offset combined with
PAPR reduction will be our next research topic.
It is also noted that the PR-DUN model is disjoint from the
MAC scheduler and can be implemented in the base station’s
baseband software as a part of physical layer. Our proposed
PR-DUN model includes one input layer, L cascaded layers,
and one output layer. The signal x and the initial auxiliary
signal c(0) are the inputs, while the transmitted signal ¯x and
modified auxiliary signal c(L) are the outputs. The lth layer is
associated with variable w(l), which is trained to minimize a
loss function described in what follows.
B. Loss Function and Batch Training
To suppress power peaks, the loss function for training the
PR-DUN is the PRR value3, which is expressed as
Loss = PRR(x, c),
(7)
where PRR(x, c) is a peak reduction ratio, for signals x and
c, given by
PRR(x, c) =
max
0⩽n⩽N−1 |xn + cn|2
E
h
∥x∥2
2
i
.
The loss function for training a batch of data of size B is
given by
LossB = 1
B
B−1
X
i=0
PRR(xi, ci),
(8)
The batch training loss is used to optimize the parameter w.
Fortunately, the unfolded network allows using the backprop-
agation algorithm to transfer gradients backwards to optimize
the parameters. Moreover, the deep unfolding network allows
more flexibility in applying convex optimization.
To train our proposed model, data is generated randomly.
Each data sample is a binary stream of length (N −
M) log2(nQAM), where nQAM is the number of bits per com-
plex symbol. Each sample passes through L layers, where
each layer computes ¯x(l), nl, α(l), c(l+1) using (2), (3), (4),
and (5), respectively. Then, Loss is calculated for the sample
based on (7). When a batch of training samples is completed,
batch loss LossB is aggregated using (8). The gradients are
computed and back-propagated to optimize the set4 w. The
training is repeated several times according to the number of
epochs. We summarize the training algorithm in Algorithm 1.
C. Complexity Analysis
A complexity analysis of the SCR [1], SLM [11], the
RNN [8], and, PRnet techniques [7] is shown in Table I.
The SCR method is an iterative algorithm that generates an
auxiliary signal to soft clip peaks. It involves several loops
and a sorting algorithm, so its computational complexity is
3Since PRR(x, c) ≥PAPR(x+c), reducing PRR leads to a smaller PAPR.
4The initial values w0 can be computed by w0 = (A/E[∥x∥2])0.51L,
where 1L is a vector of L ones, and A is a feasible PAPR threshold.
Algorithm 1 Training Algorithm for PR-DUN
1: Set N, M, L, and δ2, and select a set of reserved sub-carriers
2: Generate set of training samples
3: Initialize c and W
4: for each epoch do
5:
for each sample batch do
6:
for each sample x in the sample batch do
7:
for each layer l do
8:
Compute ¯x(l) by (2)
9:
Compute nl by (3)
10:
Compute α(l) by (4)
11:
Compute c(l+1) by (5)
12:
end for
13:
Compute Loss by (7)
14:
end for
15:
Compute LossB by (8) and calculate gradients
16:
Update W via the backpropagation algorithm
17:
end for
18: end for
TABLE I: Complexity comparison for different techniques.
Algorithm
Complexity
SCR [1]
Computational complexity
O(L log2 N)
SLM [11]
Computational complexity
O(MN 2)
RNN [8]
Number of trainable parameters
P (K2(L −2) + K + K(L −2) + 2N + 2KN + KNM)
Computational complexity
O(P K(L + 2N))
PRnet [7]
Number of trainable parameters
2(K2(L −2) + K + K(L −2) + 2N + 2KN + KNM)
Computational complexity
O(K(L + 2N))
PR-DUN
Number of trainable parameters is only L
Computational complexity
O(L log2 N)
O(L log2 N)5. The SLM algorithm’s complexity, on the other
hand, depends on the number of candidate phase sequences
and the number of sub-carriers. In the RNN model, the number
of trainable parameters depends on the hidden layer’s size
K, the number of the hidden layers L, the binary input size
M, the output size N, and the number of parallel neural
networks P. The computational complexity of the RNN model
is O(PK(L + 2N)), due to the feedfoward fully-connected
architecture. The number of trainable parameters and compu-
tational complexity of the PRnet model is similar to those of
the RNN model. Compared to the RNN and PRnet models,
our proposed PR-DUN model requires fewer parameters to be
trained. The computational complexity of the PR-DUN model
is similar to that of the SCR algorithm and significantly smaller
than the others.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section we evaluate the performance of the proposed
PR-DUN model through simulations. Unless stated otherwise,
we assume that the number of sub-carriers is N = 1024,
from which M = 32 sub-carriers are reserved for the peak
reduction purpose. Moreover, we assume 4-QAM modulation,
i.e., nQAM = 2. We generate the traing data set containing 104
samples from CIFAR-10 [13], created data batches with 100
samples per batch, and train the models for 10 epochs. The
testing set contains 103 data samples. The maximum transmit
5f(x) = O(g(x)) means that limx→∞|f(x)|/|g(x)| < ∞as in [12].
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LCOMM.2022.3195042
© 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: UCLA Library. Downloaded on November 09,2022 at 11:33:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
PAPRth (dB)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Prob(PAPR > PAPRth)
Original
23 dBm
26 dBm
29 dBm
32 dBm
Fig. 2: PAPR reduction for different transmit power constraints δ2.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
PAPRth (dB)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Prob(PAPR > PAPRth)
Original
L=5
L=10
L=15
L=20
Optimal
Fig. 3: PAPR reduction for different numbers of layers L.
power is set to 26dBm. The Adam algorithm is chosen to
minimize the batch training loss. An experimental approach
was used to determine the learning rate, which we set to 0.1
in this work. We implement the proposed algorithm using
the Pytorch framework. Our experiments are conducted on an
Intel(R) Xeon(R) @2.30GHz (2 CPUs), with 26GB of memory
and a GPU Tesla P100-PCIE-16GB.
The PAPR performance of the PR-DUN versus the trans-
mit power constraint δ2 is demonstrated in Fig. 2. In this
experiment, δ2 is varied from 23dBm to 32dBm (δ2
=
23, 26, 29, 32dBm). It is shown that the PAPR reduction
achieved by the proposed PR-DUN increases with the increase
in δ2. This is because more power is allocated to the auxiliary
signal to cancel the peaks. However, the PAPR reduction
saturates at 29dBm. This is due to the fact that the auxiliary
signal itself induces secondary peaks from side lobes [1],
which rise with the increase in the auxiliary signal’s power.
Fig. 3 compares the PAPR reduction of the PR-DUN for
different numbers of layers. We observe that increasing the
number of layers in the PR-DUN results in a higher reduction
in the PAPR. However, the performance saturates at a point,
above which increasing the number of layers does not result in
considerable performance gain. This is explained by the fact
that the PAPR reduction is lower bounded by the solution of
the QCQP problem, as depicted in Fig. 2.
Fig. 4 depicts the impact of the number of reserved sub-
carriers on the PAPR reduction performance. It is shown that
more reserved sub-carriers leads to better PAPR reduction.
However, since the proposed solution is required to satisfy
a transmit power constraint, the performance gain achieved
by increasing the number of reserved sub-carriers inevitably
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
PAPRth (dB)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Prob(PAPR > PAPRth)
Original
M=16
M=32
M=64
M=72
Fig. 4: PAPR reduction for different numbers of reserved sub-carriers.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
PAPRth (dB)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Prob(PAPR > PAPRth)
Original
SLM
PRnet
RNN
ICF
SCR
PR-DUN (random)
PR-DUN
Optimal (random)
Optimal
Fig. 5: PAPR reduction performance of different algorithms.
reaches a saturation point. This is because more reserved sub-
carriers require more power and produce more side lobes.
In Fig. 5, we compare our 10-layer PR-DUN model to
the SCR [1] and ICF [14] algorithms, which both have the
PAPR target at 6dB, the SLM algorithm [11], which uses
eight random phase vectors, the PR-DUN (random)6, the RNN
model [8], the PRnet model [7], and the optimal solution of
the QCQP problem in (1). In Fig. 5, the number of sub-carriers
is set to 2048, but the ratio between the number of sub-carriers
and the number of reserved sub-carrier is fixed as N/M = 32.
The figure shows that our proposed PR-DUN achieves the
largest reduction of PAPR among the considered models and
algorithms. For a 0.2 CCDF, the PR-DUN model reduces the
PAPR by around 5.4dB; whereas, the SLM, PRnet, RNN, ICF,
and SCR techniques reduce it by around 6.8dB, 6.2dB, and
6.1dB, 5.5dB, and 6dB respectively. Except for the ICF and
SCR algorithms that satisfy their PAPR targets, compared to
the SLM algorithm, the PRnet and the RNN models, our PAPR
reduction is lower by at least 1.4dB. The PR-DUN outperforms
the PRnet and RNN models because it induces no distortion
caused by the clipping noise. The signal distortion is generated
during the clipping processes of the RNN model, which hard
clips the signal, and the PRnet, which adjusts the constellation.
Their increased distortion limits the PAPR reduction to achieve
the greater extent as their loss functions consider the BER
6PR-DUN (random) is our PR-DUN that allocates random sub-carrier for
each data sample rather than a static one, thus providing more flexibility in
resource allocation but at the cost of side information overhead [5].
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LCOMM.2022.3195042
© 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: UCLA Library. Downloaded on November 09,2022 at 11:33:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Eb/No(dB)
10−13
10−11
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
BER
ICF
PRnet
RNN
SCR
PR-DUN
PR-DUN (random)
Optimal
Optimal (random)
SLM
Ideal HPA
10−6
10−5
10−4
Fig. 6: BER performance of different algorithms.
reduction. Although the SLM algorithm causes no signal
distortion, but its performance is limited due to the constrained
number of phase vectors. In contrast, the PR-DUN model
generates an auxiliary signal adaptively based on the input
signal to soft clip the power peaks, which does not contribute
to the signal distortion. Furthermore, the parameters of the PR-
DUN model are trained to adapt to dynamic input signals to
maximize its performance. Therefore, our proposed PR-DUN
model achieves a better PAPR reduction than the considered
related works while satisfying the power limitation.
Fig. 6 depicts the BER performance of the considered
techniques under different Eb/No or signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) values. The “Ideal High Performance Amplifier (HPA)”
method’s data is collected by passing the original OFDM
signals through a linear HPA. For the SLM method, the
receiver errorlessly decodes the side information. Fig. 6 shows
that when the SNR increases to 30dB, the BER of our
proposed PR-DUN decreases by about 10 times lower than
the ICF algorithm and the RNN and PRnet models. This
is due to the signal distortion caused by the hard clipping
process of the ICF algorithm and the RNN model, and the
constellation adjustment of the PRnet model, make the peak-
reduced signal prune to channel conditions, thus deteriorating
the BER performance. In contrast, our proposed PR-DUN
model uses an auxiliary signal modulated in a subset of sub-
carriers to soft clip the power peaks, which involves neither
clipping nor constellation adjustment, so that the PR-DUN
model achieves a better BER performance. The PR-DUN
model performs slightly better than the SCR algorithm because
it achieves larger PAPR reduction than the SCR algorithm.
Since the PR-DUN is trained to adaptively soft clip power
peaks without consider a PAPR target, it can achieve better
BER performance due to a better PAPR reduction. In addition,
the PR-DUN model’s BER performance is closed to that of
the SLM algorithm and the Ideal HPA since it does not cause
signal distortion.
Finally, we measured the PR-DUN’s execution time. The
average training time per epoch is approximately 15s, i.e.,
completing one data batch needs about 150ms. The training
time includes around 24.7ms for the back propagation algo-
rithm to update parameters and approximately 125.3ms for
100 passes of the data batch, i.e., each data sample needs
roughly 1.253ms to complete. On the other hand, it takes
nearly 0.934ms per sample for the PR-DUN model to execute
in the inference phase, which is suitable for practical cases.
V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we proposed a deep unfolding model to
reduce the PAPR while satisfying the power limitation. A few
trainable parameters are embedded into the proposed model to
determine the clipping threshold adaptively, and the parameters
are optimized over a loss function of peak values, namely
the PRR. We apply a power control algorithm to limit the
power increment caused by the auxiliary signal. Simulation
results show that our proposed solution achieves a larger
PAPR reduction than related techniques while satisfying the
power constraint and being less computationally complex. The
PAPR reduction achieved by the proposed PR-DUN depends
on the number of layers, number of sub-carriers, and the power
limitation. Moreover, our BER performance is better than the
considered neural network-based methods and iterative PAPR
suppression algorithms.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Tellado and J. M. Cioffi, “Peak power reduction for multi-carrier
transmission,” in IEEE GLOBECOM’98, 1998, pp. 219–224.
[2] H. Li, T. Jiang, and Y. Zhou, “An improved tone reservation scheme
with fast convergence for PAPR reduction in OFDM systems,” IEEE
Trans. Broadcast., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 902–906, 2011.
[3] P. Yu and S. Jin, “A low complexity tone reservation scheme based
on time-domain kernel matrix for PAPR reduction in OFDM systems,”
IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 710–716, 2015.
[4] J. Wang, X. Lv, and W. Wu, “Scr-based tone reservation schemes with
fast convergence for PAPR reduction in OFDM system,” IEEE Wireless
Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 624–627, 2019.
[5] Y. Wang, W. Chen, and C. Tellambura, “Genetic algorithm based nearly
optimal peak reduction tone set selection for adaptive amplitude clipping
PAPR reduction,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 462–471,
2012.
[6] I. Sohn and S. C. Kim, “Neural network based simplified clipping
and filtering technique for PAPR reduction of OFDM signals,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1438–1441, 2015.
[7] M. Kim, W. Lee, and D.-H. Cho, “A novel PAPR reduction scheme for
OFDM system based on deep learning,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22,
no. 3, pp. 510–513, 2018.
[8] Z. Liu, X. Hu, K. Han, S. Zhang, L. Sun, L. Xu, W. Wang, and
F. M. Ghannouchi, “Low-complexity PAPR reduction method for OFDM
systems based on real-valued neural networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun.
Lett., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 1840–1844, 2020.
[9] H. Li, J. Wei, and N. Jin, “Low-complexity tone reservation scheme us-
ing pre-generated peak-canceling signals,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23,
no. 9, pp. 1586–1589, 2019.
[10] B. Wang, Q. Si, and M. Jin, “A novel tone reservation scheme based on
deep learning for PAPR reduction in OFDM systems,” IEEE Commun.
Lett., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 1271–1274, 2020.
[11] L. Yang, K. K. Soo, Y. M. Siu, and S. Q. Li, “A low complexity selected
mapping scheme by use of time domain sequence superposition tech-
nique for PAPR reduction in OFDM system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast.,
vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 821–824, 2008.
[12] S. Kwon and N. B. Shroff, “Analysis of shortest path routing for large
multi-hop wireless networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 857–869, 2009.
[13] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,”
Tech. Rep., 2009.
[14] A. J., “Peak-to-average power reduction for OFDM by repeated clipping
and frequency domain filtering,” Electronics Letters, vol. 38, no. 5, pp.
246–247, 2002.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LCOMM.2022.3195042
© 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: UCLA Library. Downloaded on November 09,2022 at 11:33:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
